Netflow is a network protocol that collects IP traffic information. Although it was developed by Cisco, it supports Netflow from different manufacturers. Some manufacturers support Sflow or different similar protocols. It is important for it to provide visibility on the network with this protocol regardless of its brand or the developer of the protocol.

NetFlow operates in a stateful manner, monitoring and reporting all IP traffic traversing the monitored interface. Each IP communication is defined as a flow, which represents a set of packets sharing key attributes between a source and destination.

When performing log analysis, the first thing to check is the IP and port information. Once we have this information, we should examine whether the traffic reached its target under the "action" field. 
In other words, firewall logs provide us with information on the source and destination of the traffic as well as the port used for communication.

VPN is the technology that allows you to connect to a local network that you are not physically connected to. Generally, organizations prefer this technology to access their internal systems remotely.

The most critical elements to analyze in VPN logs are:
The source IP address initiating the connection
The authenticated username
The access request result (success or failure status)

Proxy logs are one of the most important log types when a SOC analyst needs to check which domain/URL a system (server, client, etc.) is making a request to our internal systems and whether it was able to establish a successful connection. 
It is also important to be able to determine if the domain/URL is a risky category and if there were able establish any successful connections before.

We can detect following suspicious activities through reviewing the proxy logs:
Connections to/from suspicious URLs
Infected system detection
Detection of tunneling activities

The IDS/IPS concept and solutions are technologies developed at the point where only rule-based access controls of firewall devices are not sufficient in the security world. 
Roughly, while the firewall works on a rule basis so that red apples shall pass and yellows not, IDS/IPS solutions can check whether there are worms in the apple or not. In other words, it has a decision-making mechanism by inspecting the packet content

IDS and IPS have signature database. A signature is a set of rules designed to detect known attacks. The structure that presents this set of rules centrally is called the signature database. 

Following information should be investigated in details when analyzing IDS/IPS logs;

The direction of attack (inbound or outbound) should be checked.
The event severity level should be checked. Levels are usually set as low, medium, high, critical. High and critical levels indicate that activity is more important, quick action is required, and a false positive is less likely.
A different signature trigger state should be checked between the same source and target. Triggering different signatures means that the severity level of the event should be raised higher and a faster action should be taken. 
The event is resolved within the service level agreement (SLA) depending on its severity level in case of following situations like:
If a single signature is triggered,
there are no different requests from the relevant source,
there is no different accept in the firewall logs.

 Is the port/service specified in the attack detail running on the target port? If it is running, the event level should be raised to the critical level, and the target system should be checked for infection. 
It should also be checked whether a response has been returned to the relevant system from the source. If the answer is no, blocking the attacking IP address as a precaution would be an appropriate action.

Is the action taken just detection or has it been blocked as well? If the attack is blocked and there are no other requests from the same IP address on the firewall, we can wait a little longer for taking the action. 
However, if the action taken for the attack is only a detection, then other similar requests should be reviewed and block action should be applied if the content of the requests coming from the IP address is not false positive.


#WAF Log Analysis
WAF (Web Application Firewall) is the technology used to secure web-based applications. The analysis of firewall or IDS/IPS logs alone are often not sufficient for the detection of web-based attacks. 
The main reasons for this are the SSL offload issue and the control of the data in the payload (data) part of the web request.

SSL Offload is the decryption of SSL-encrypted traffic. The main purpose of the system is to reduce the load and increase performance, as well as to decrypt the encrypted traffic/request to make the content visible and controllable from a security point of view. 
In this way, invisible attack vectors in encrypted traffic become detectable or preventable.

In networks equipped with WAF, requests from end users reach WAF first over the internet. Then the WAF inspects the request, and makes the decision whether it will be transferred to the Web Server or not. 
One of the biggest advantages of WAFs here is that it can perform SSL Off-load, which helps examine the content of HTTPS traffic.


WAF systems are generally the systems that handle the web access requests on the public faced systems. 
Therefore, we can say that WAFs are the first systems to detect web attacks and WAF logs are the ones that help SOC Analysts to detect suspicious activities.

 It is very important for SOC Analysts to be able to analyze web logs correctly. The most commonly used web servers are Microsoft IIS, Apache, Nginx.
Although the applications are different, the web server logs have similar contents.

Usually (by default) web servers do not write the content of the data sent to the server by POST or PUT to the web log. Therefore, it is important to know this when analyzing web logs.

Server responds back to the requests with some number expressions. These response codes indicates whether the request is successful or unsuccessful.


User-Agent Information: Indicates the application that was used for the request. User-Agent information will help understand whether the requests made are by a real user or an automated scanning tool during the web log analysis. Some of the automated web scanning tools are “nikto”, “nessus”, “nmap”. If we see "Mozilla, Chrome", or a similar web browser information on the User-Agent information section that means the request was made by a real user.
However, the User-Agent information may be changed and so we should be aware of that and make sure to verify the information we see within the logs.

DNS is one of the most basic building blocks of the internet. DNS is basically a technology that is used for domain - IP resolution. 
Network traffic is basically conducted over IPs and DNS is the system that tells us what the IP address for the server of google.com when we need to access "google.com" .

We should keep the followings when checking these logs:
Has the system made domain requests in categories that actually should not access?
Has the system made domain requests that are actually risky categories?
Were any known services (google drive, one drive, etc.) attempted to access during situations like data leak, and etc.?
Is there any systems that make requests to domains obtained from Threat Intelligence resources?
Investigations on DNS logs should be conducted to detect if there is access to DNS Over TLS (DOT) or DNS over HTTPS (DOH) services.





