An Intrusion Detection System (IDS) is hardware or software used to detect security breaches and attacks by monitoring a network or host.

Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS):Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS) is used to detect whether there is traffic suitable for attacker behavior by passing all traffic on the network through it. When abnormal behavior is observed in the traffic, an alert can be generated and the administrator can be informed.

Host Intrusion Detection System (HIDS):The Host Intrusion Detection System (HIDS) works on a specific host in the network. It tries to detect malicious activities by examining all network packets coming to this device and all network packets going from this device. Detected malicious behaviors are reported to the administrator as an alert.

Protocol-Based Intrusion Detection System (PIDS):A protocol-Based Intrusion Detection System (PIDS) is a type of IDS that examines the traffic between a server and a client in a protocol-specific way.

Application Protocol-based Intrusion Detection System (APIDS): An Application Protocol-Based Intrusion Detection System (APIDS) is a type of IDS that tries to detect security breaches by monitoring communication in application-specific protocols.

Hybrid Intrusion Detection System:A hybrid Intrusion Detection System is a type of IDS in which two or more violation detection approaches are used together.

Some popular IDS products used in the cybersecurity industry are as follows:
Zeek/Bro
Snort
Suricata
Fail2Ban
OSSEC



Intrusion Prevention System (IPS)
An Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) is hardware or software that detects security violations by monitoring a network or host and prevents security violations by taking the necessary action.

Types of IPS
Network-Based Intrusion Prevention System (NIPS)
Host-Based Intrusion Prevention System (HIPS)
Network Behavior Analysis (NBA)
Wireless Intrusion Prevention System (WIPS)

Some popular IPS products used within the cybersecurity industry are as follows:
Cisco NGIPS
Suricata
Fidelis

Types of Firewall
Application-Level Gateways (Proxy Firewalls)
Circuit-Level Gateways
Cloud Firewalls
Endpoint Firewalls
Network Address Translation (NAT) Firewalls
Next-Generation Firewalls (NGFW)
Packet-Filtering Firewalls
Stateful Multi-Layer Inspection (SMLI) Firewalls
Threat-Focused NGFW
Unified Threat Management (UTM) Firewalls

A firewall is one of the most basic security solutions that should be included in a network. It would not be right to talk about the complete security of a corporate network without a firewall. In addition to being in the existing network, it is also very important that the firewall is correctly configured and managed. It is not possible to protect the network or related host from attacks using only a firewall.
Some popular Firewall products used in the cybersecurity industry are as follows:
Fortinet
Palo Alto Networks
SonicWall
Checkpoint
Juniper
pfsense
Sophos



Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR)
Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) is a security product that is installed on endpoint-qualified devices, constantly monitors the activities in the system, tries to detect security threats such as ransomware & malware, and takes action against malicious activities.

EDR products can perform many different operations on the endpoint device. These are the processes that support each other to ensure the security of the device. EDR core components are as follows:
Endpoint data collection agents
Automated response
Analysis and forensics

Ensuring the security of the devices that EDR products need to protect has become an essential element to be considered today. Because attackers aim to gain access to the network by turning to weak devices in terms of security. After gaining access to the network through an endpoint, the attacker tries to access more critical systems. In this way, if there is an endpoint that does not have an EDR product installed and is not sufficiently secure, it can be used by the attacker for initial access.
SentinelOne
Crowdstrike
CarbonBlack
Palo Alto
FireEye HX


Antivirus Software (AV)
Antivirus Software (AV) is security software that detects malware on devices and blocks and removes malware from the system before it harms the device.

Types of Antivirus Software
Signature-Based Scanning
Heuristic Scanning

Some popular Antivirus products used in the cybersecurity industry are as follows:
McAfee
Symantec
Bitdefender
Eset
Norton

